I hope you're starting to see that the syntax of Python is extremely straightforward and easy to type
and read.
This will become even more clear when we start dealing with loops.
So let's get rid of the code that we've worked with so far and see how we create a for loop in Python.
Now you'll remember in javascript H-P we had to do things like four.
And then we had to create our variable in javascript to at least set it equal to zero.
Have a semi-colon keep going until well as long as I's less than 10 and then set up plus plus to iterate
each time and then have actually brackets it wasn't really very nice to look at in Python.
It's a lot more straightforward.
So if we want to do a for loop that goes from say 0 to 10 we just use for i in and then range.
And if we want to go from 0 to 10 we would put in 11 which is slightly mysterious but essentially think
of it as 0 up to but not including the number here.
So zero up to 10.
And then we put a colon to say what's coming next.
And then you'll notice that my text editor as indented to the next line.
And that's not just for fun because anything that's indented is going to be inside our loop.
And then when we go back to not indenting that's when loop ends.
So what I might have for the moment is just print.
I let's have a look at that.
So you can see we get the numbers from 0 to 10 and then if I have say print Rob that was that going
to be that will print Raub in between each number.
But if I don't indent that then it will only print Raub at the end.
So the indenting is not just for making nice pretty code here.
It's actually critical to the functioning of the script.
If we wanted to have our range not starting at zero.
We just put the starting number in has an extra option in our range command there and then we get the
numbers from 5 to 10.
So notice that the syntax for the follow up is completely different to how it was before.
And it actually looks more like a foreach loop that we're used to seeing in HP.
And that's indeed exactly what it is.
Essentially this range 5 11 is creating what we might think of as an array or in Python a list of the
numbers 5 6 7 8 9 10.
And then I'm just looping through those.
So here's the challenge for you.
Can you create a list containing three of your favorite foods and then just print.
I like eating.
And then each of those types of food using the full Gayford.
All right I managed it.
I'm going to create a list called favorite foods could create a tuple as well as when I'm going to be
editing it and I'm going to put pizza
chocolate ice cream because I'm a healthy kind of guy.
Then to iterate through this list we just use four and then we can use whatever variable name we like.
I'm going to use food and then in just as before and then favorite foods then we use the colon and anything
that's indented is going to be inside our league here.
And then something like print.
I like eating.
And then plus just like in javascript food we might want a full stop at the end of that as well.
OK.
Just take a look at it.
I like eating pizza.
Like eating chocolate.
I like eating ice cream.
So I think that's a really neat way of looping through arrays and actually a lot nicer and how it's
done in either javascript or ph P of course as well as the for loop.
We also have the while loop in Python.
So if we wanted to print the numbers 9:59 with a while loop we might do something like this.
We'd start with our counter variable that I'll do X this time and set it equal to the starting Valley
and then we want to keep doing a while loop as long as X is less than or equal to 10.
And then a colon to say that we're now writing the code for a while loop and then we want to print X
and the crucial line is X equals x plus 1.
If you don't write that it's going to print 0 forever and ever.
Let's take a look.
There you go.
Of course just like in Python and Javascript we can use to get out x plus plus as well.
Note that there's no X plus plus in Python.
If we try and run that will get a nasty error or we can use the slightly simpler X plus equals one to
add one to X and that will work fine.
So time for a challenge.
This one is going to put a lot of what we've covered in this video and the previous video together but
it shouldn't be too tricky from a programming point of view.
In python we use the hash to denote a comment or one line comment.
So I'm going to use one of those to describe what I want you to do.
So I'd like you to create a dictionary
containing four names and ages of people.
So the names should be the keys.
And the ages should be the values within the dictionary and then create a loop which prints for each
person their age.
Simple as that.
So that's pretty straightforward programming set up.
But it does require you to remember how to define and create a dictionary.
Loop through it and then extract the key and the value which is actually something I haven't shown you
yet.
So you're either going to have to have a guess and it is actually quite guessable or have a quick google
to see how you get those values.
They look different.
All right.
Here we go.
So I'm going to start by defining my age's dictionary.
I'm going to do it by setting it see a pair of curly brackets like that and then I'm going to set up
ages Rob is equal to a thirty five ages Caston they put 236 ages Tommy
let's go play square brackets in the wrong place then Tomi is equal to a five and age is Ralphy is equal
to 1.
All right then we're going to loop through the ages dictionary which will be using for age in
ages.
Colon.
And then because I'm not certain what this is going to give me is it going to give me the values or
is it going to give me the keys or is it going to give me some combination of the two.
I'm going to print each first off just to see what that does.
So let's have a look.
Aha.
So that gives me the four keys.
That is Rob Ralphy Keston and told me these values down here.
So if I want to get the ages then I just need to use ages H and that should give me 35 36.
5.
One day I began.
So now let's put it all together.
So I want to start with H and then
I want to append to that is a couple of spaces and then I want to put the number on the end.
So that's ages age.
Now I'm a little bit concerned about that because ages age is a number whereas these are strings.
So I'm just going to save it and have a look and see what happens.
Nothing happens at all.
So I must have to do something to convert that to a string so I could either look it up or have a guess
it might be something like string or maybe a shortened version.
SAGAL So let's try that out.
And there we go.
Rubus thirty five Ralphy is one custom is 36 and Tomi is five.
So you might reasonably have not guessed the SDR but that would have been a fairly easy thing to Google.
And the rest of it was eminently figure out.
Notice that the order is different to the order that I've set it.
It's actually gone Rob Ralphy Keston told me.
And essentially you shouldn't think of dictionaries as ordered in any way a dictionary is designed to
store a key value pairs not to store the order of data within it.
Excellent.
So that takes us to the end of looking at loops in Python.
In the next video we'll see how Python deals with the other basic coding construct.
And that is if statements.